[KIP-103] Treasury Fund Rebalancing (#104)
klaytn/kips: KIPs/kip-draft_kgp6.md

- The foundation should deploy new TreasuryRebalance contract to record the token redistribution.
- To rebalance the funds and redistribute in a consistent manner the foundation should burn the designated funds before re-distribution.
- This does not affect the backward compatibility as this a newly dpeloyed contract

## Implementation

<!--The implementations must be completed before any KIP is given status "Final", but it need not be completed before the KIP is accepted. While there is merit to the approach of reaching consensus on the specification and rationale before writing code, the principle of "rough consensus and running code" is still useful when it comes to resolving many discussions of API details.-->

#### Example implementation

```solidity
interface ITreasuryRebalance {
    // Events
    event ContractDeployed(
        uint256 rebalanceBlockNumber,
        uint256 deployedBlockNumber
    );
    event RetiredRegistered(address retired);

>     event RetiredRemoved(address retired, uint256 retiredCount);

Reviewer: Why only RetiredRemoved() as retiredCount? What about RetiredRegistered()?

Author: For debug purpose logging the count to see if its removed from the list.

Reviewer: If it is just for debuging purpose, it would be good to remove the count in KIP.

    event NewbieRegistered(address newbie, uint256 fundAllocation);
    event NewbieRemoved(address newbie, uint256 newbieCount);
    event Approved(address retired, address approver, uint256 approversCount);
    event StatusChanged(Status status);
    event Finalized(string memo);

    // Enums
    enum Status {
        Initialized,
        Registered,
        Approved,
        Finalized
    }

    struct Retired {
        address retired;
        address[] approvers;
    }

    struct Newbie {
        address newbie;
        uint256 amount;
    }

>     // State variables

Reviewer 2: I assume `Retired[] retirees` and `Newbie[] newbies` are public state variables? Interfaces of them would be
```solidity
function retirees(uint256 index) external view returns (address);
function newbies(uint256 index) external view returns (address, uint256);
```
Note that `Retired.approvers` is not available from the automatic getters because it's a nested array.

If we want to either (1) get all retirees and newbies at one call, or (2) get `approvers` array, we need separate getters. For example,
```solidity
function getRetirees() external view returns (address[] memory, address[][] memory);
function getNewbies() external view returns (address[] memory, uint256[] memory);
```

Author: yes there are separate getters to get retired and newbie details

Reviewer 2: If `finalizeContract()` is the getter you've mentioned, then I'm confused because `finalizeContract()` is apparently a state-changing function. Like @kjhman21 mentioned in the other comment, it might be easier to understand if this function is separated into e.g. a state-changing `finalizeContract()` and a getter `getStatus()`

Author: Yes `finalizeContract()` is a state changing function.  This return statement was added as per one of the [comment](https://github.com/klaytn/kips/pull/104#discussion_r1125859837) to see these values in txn receipt. 

However will remove this return. There are separate getter [functions](https://github.com/klaytn/treasury-rebalance/blob/main/contracts/TreasuryRebalance.sol#L370) to get status and other values.

Let me know if we need one getter function to get all the values like 
```
function getSnapshot() public view returns(
            address[] memory retirees, 
            uint256 totalRetireesBalance,
            address[] memory newbies,
            uint256 totalNewbiesFund, 
            Status status,
            string memory memo) 
 {
 }
 ```

Reviewer 2: Now I see that `retirees(index)` and `getRetired(address)` combo can return every state somehow.
Then I am okay with the current interface. Can you just add `retirees` and `newbies` to ITreasuryRebalance for clarity?

Reviewer 2: @toniya-klaytn `getSnapshot()` clears my concern. Thanks.

    function status() external view returns (Status);
    function rebalanceBlockNumber() external view returns (uint256);
    function memo() external view returns (string memory);

    // State changing functions

>     function registerRetired(address retiredAddress) external;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    function registerRetired(address retiredAddress) onlyAdmin external;
```

I think this can be executed by admin only?

Author: Yes but in general Interface cannot declare modifiers.  Can we add as comments ?

Reviewer: yes, please do so. Thanks.

    function removeRetired(address retiredAddress) external;

>     function registerNewbie(address newbieAddress, uint256 _amount) external;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    function registerNewbie(address newbieAddress, uint256 amount) external;
```
Do we need to have an underscore for a parameter?

Author: Interface needs to updated.

    function removeNewbie(address newbieAddress) external;
    function approve(address retiredAddress) external;

>     function finalizeRegistration() external;

Reviewer: Who can call the finalize functions?
if we cannot specify that information using modifier, we need to add a comment for the info.

Author: Sure will add comments for the interface

    function finalizeApproval() external;

>     function finalizeContract(string memory memo) external view returns(address[] memory retirees, uint256 totalRetireesBalance, address[] memory newbies, uint256 totalNewbiesFund);

Reviewer: Can we have a function to retrieve all the values like:
```
function treasuryStatus() external view returns(Status status, uint256 rebalanceBlockNumber, address[] memory retirees, address[] memory approvers, address[] memory newbies, uint256[] memory newbieBalances);
```

Author: We have separate getter function to retrieve these values. Do we need one function to retrieve all values at once ?

Reviewer 3: FYI, The following is the format of `memo` I am considering now. When the rebalancing is finished, users can see the result by getting `memo`. 
`{"success": true/false, "retried":[{"0xaddr": "0xamount"}, ...], "newbie": [{"0xaddr":"0xamount"}, ...], "bunt": "0xamount"}`

The memo format will be updated with the explanation of the core side logic since public users can parse them easily.

    function reset() external;
}
```

> Implementation : https://github.com/klaytn/treasury-rebalance/tree/main/contracts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reference Implementation: https://github.com/klaytn/treasury-rebalance/tree/main/contracts
```

## Test Cases

<!--Test cases for an implementation are mandatory for KIPs that are affecting consensus changes. Other KIPs can choose to include links to test cases if applicable.-->

> https://github.com/klaytn/treasury-rebalance/blob/main/test/TreasuryRebalance.js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find test cases for this KIP, please refer to [this link](https://github.com/klaytn/treasury-rebalance/blob/main/test/TreasuryRebalance.js).
```

- `registerNewbie`: to register newbie address and its fund distribution.
- `removeNewbie`: to remove newbie details from the array.
- `finalizeRegistration`: sets the status to Registered only executed by owner. After this stage, registrations will be restricted.
- `approve`: to approve a retiredAddress by the admin.
- `finalizeApproval`: sets the status to Approved. After this stage, approvals will be restricted.
  </br>
  **Conditions**
  - every retiredAddress must be approved
  - min required admin’s approval is done for retired contract address.
  - sum of retired’s balance is greater than sum of the newbies' amount
    </br>
- `reset`: resets all storage values to empty objects except rebalanceBlockNumber. It can only be called during Initialization, Registration and Approved status.
- `finalizeContract`: to record the execution result of the rebalance and finalize the contract. The storage data cannot be modified after this stage.

#### Fallback Function

The smart contract will have a fallback function to revert any payments. Since its a treasury contract, it should not accept any payments nor it should allow any withdrawal.

### Core Logic Overview

> TBU - describe how to read contract data and execute rebalancing in Klaytn node

Reviewer 3: To enable treasury fund rebalancing, a Klaytn node should specify a deployed smart contract address and a target block number on the node configuration like hardfork items. At the configured block number, a Klaytn node reads registered information from the smart contract and executes treasury fund rebalancing.

#### Chain Configuration
ChainConfig introduces the following fields for treasury fund rebalancing. The configurations are used to trigger rebalancing and find the contract storing rebalancing information. All nodes in the network should update `genesis.json` configuration with the same value as if updating a hardfork block number. The configuration values for Baobab and Cypress networks can be hard coded on the client source code. 

- `kip103CompatibleBlock`: Treasury fund rebalancing executing block which is the same as `rebalanceBlockNumber` of the smart contract
- `kip103ContractAddress`: The address of the treasury fund rebalancing contract

#### Validation
Before executing rebalancing, registered values on the smart contract are validated to confirm whether the owners of the retired account agree on the rebalancing and whether the rebalancing doesn't cause inflation of KLAY. The following should be confirmed before the execution. 

- `kip103ContractAddress` == `contract.rebalanceBlockNumber`: Ensure the owner of the retired account agree on this timing
-  `contract.status` == `Approved`: Confirm the status of the contract is ready to rebalance 
- `contract.checkRetiredsApproved()`: Double-check the agreement of the retired accounts' owners at the execution time since the ownership is replaceable
-  `totalRetiredAmount >= totalNewbieAmount`: Ensure the rebalancing doesn't issue any KLAY

#### Execution
The rebalancing is executed at the last of the block processing process. In other words, it is executed after processing all transactions of the block and distributing block rewards. If a retired account is one of the receiver of the block reward, the amount also will be used for rebalancing. All KLAY newbies have before rebalancing will be burnt as well. After rebalancing, the remaining KLAY of retired accounts will be burnt. The following is the new balancing allocating logic including burn. 

```
for addr := range Retireds {
	state.SetBalance(addr, 0)
}

for addr, balance := Newbie {
	// if newbie has KLAY before the allocation, it will be burnt 
	currentBalance := state.GetBalance(addr) 
	Burnt = Burnt + currentBalance

	state.SetBalance(addr, balance)
}
```

#### Result
The execution result of treasury fund rebalancing will be printed as an INFO-level log on each node. The owner of the treasury rebalancing contract is supposed to update the log on the smart contract as `memo` finalizing the status of the contract. Anyone can read and verify the rebalancing result by interacting with the smart contract. The data type of `memo` is byte array containing marshaled json data. Refer to the following format and example if you want to parse it. 

```Format
{
  "retired": {"0xRetiredAddress1":[removed balance in PEB], "0xRetiredAddress2":[removed balance in PEB], ... },
  "newbie" {"0xNewbieAddress1":[new allocated balance in PEB], "0xNewbieAddress2":[new allocated balance in PEB], ... },,
  "burnt":[bunt amount in PEB],
  "success":true
}

```

```Example
memo="{
  "retired": {"0x38138d89c321b3b5f421e9452b69cf29e4380bae":117000000000000000000000000000000000000, "0x30208f32c70e8b53a67ea171c8720cbfe32888ff":117000000000000000000000000000000000000},
  "newbie" {"0x0a33a1b99bd67a7189573dd74de80293afdf969a":22500000000000000000000000000000000000, "0xd9de2697000c3665e9c5a71e1bf52aaa44507cc0":22500000000000000000000000000000000000},
  "burnt":72000000000000000000000000000000000000,
  "success":true
}
```

Author: @aidan-kwon How about below memo format 
```
{
  "retirees": [
    {
      "retired": "0x38138d89c321b3b5f421e9452b69cf29e4380bae",
      "balance": 20000000000000000000
    },
    {
      "retired": "0x0a33a1b99bd67a7189573dd74de80293afdf969a",
      "balance": 20000000000000000000
    }
  ],
  "newbies": [
    {
      "newbie": "0x38138d89c321b3b5f421e9452b69cf29e4380bae",
      "fundAllocated": 10000000000000000000
    },
    {
      "newbie": "0x0a33a1b99bd67a7189573dd74de80293afdf969a",
      "fundAllocated": 10000000000000000000
    }
  ],
  "burnt": 7.2e+37,
  "success": true
}
```

```
for addr := range Retireds {
	state.SetBalance(addr, 0)
}

for addr, balance := Newbie {
	// if newbie has KLAY before the allocation, it will be burnt
	currentBalance := state.GetBalance(addr)
	Burnt = Burnt + currentBalance

	state.SetBalance(addr, balance)
}
```

#### Result

The execution result of treasury fund rebalancing will be printed as an INFO-level log on each node. The owner of the treasury rebalancing contract is supposed to update the log on the smart contract as `memo` finalizing the status of the contract. Anyone can read and verify the rebalancing result by interacting with the smart contract. The data type of `memo` is byte array containing marshaled json data. Refer to the following format and example if you want to parse it.

```Format

> {
>   "retirees": [{"retired": "0xRetiredAddress1", "balance": "removed balance in PEB"},
>     {"retired": "0xRetiredAddress2", "balance": "removed balance in PEB"}],
>   "newbies": [{"newbie": "0xNewbieAddress1", "fundAllocated": "new allocated balance in PEB"},
>     {"newbie": "0xNewbieAddress2","fundAllocated": "new allocated balance in PEB"}],
>   "burnt": "burnt amount in PEB",
>   "success": true
> }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{
  "retirees": [{"retired": "0xRetiredAddress1", "balance": "removed balance in Peb"},
    {"retired": "0xRetiredAddress2", "balance": "removed balance in Peb"}],
  "newbies": [{"newbie": "0xNewbieAddress1", "fundAllocated": "new allocated balance in Peb"},
    {"newbie": "0xNewbieAddress2","fundAllocated": "new allocated balance in Peb"}],
  "burnt": "burnt amount in Peb",
  "success": true
}
```

> {
>   "retirees": [{"retired": "0xRetiredAddress1", "balance": "removed balance in PEB"},
>     {"retired": "0xRetiredAddress2", "balance": "removed balance in PEB"}],
>   "newbies": [{"newbie": "0xNewbieAddress1", "fundAllocated": "new allocated balance in PEB"},
>     {"newbie": "0xNewbieAddress2","fundAllocated": "new allocated balance in PEB"}],
>   "burnt": "burnt amount in PEB",
>   "success": true
> }
> ```
> 
> Note: 10^18 Peb is equal to 1 KLAY

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{
  "retirees": [{"retired": "0xRetiredAddress1", "balance": "removed balance in Peb"},
    {"retired": "0xRetiredAddress2", "balance": "removed balance in Peb"}],
  "newbies": [{"newbie": "0xNewbieAddress1", "fundAllocated": "new allocated balance in Peb"},
    {"newbie": "0xNewbieAddress2","fundAllocated": "new allocated balance in Peb"}],
  "burnt": "burnt amount in Peb",
  "success": true
}
```

Note: 10^18 Peb is equal to 1 KLAY
```

The proposed smart contract will be implemented in Solidity and will be compatible with the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM). The smart contract will use Ownable contract to restrict access to certain functions to the owner of the contract.

The smart contract will have the following features:

- Add/Remove fund addresses
- Approve fund addresses and fund allocation
- Reset the storage values at any unforeseen circumstances before Finalized
- Finalize the smart contract after execution

### Smart Contracts Overview

#### Enums

The smart contract will have the following enum to track the status of the contract:

- `Initialized - 0`: The initial state of the contract.
- `Registered - 1`: Senders and receivers registered.
- `Approved - 2`: Senders approved.
- `Finalized - 3`: Rebalance executed and finalized.

#### Life Cycle

The contract status should follow the ENUM order above during status change. The only way to go to previous state is by calling Reset() function.

![](../assets/kip-103/lifecycle.png)

Status transition

- Initialized → Registered → Approved → Finalized ✅

> - Initialized → Registered → Finalized ❌

Reviewer: In the diagram, it does not have the arrow for the transition Registered -> Finalized.

Author: Yes its not included because the transition is not possible

Reviewer: Hmm.. why do we need this statement then?
It seems like this statement describes impossible state transition. I think we can just describe possible state transitions and say that other state transition is impossible.

Author: Got it, Removed the impossible status transition

Reviewer: @toniya-klaytn Seems not removed..?

- Initialized → Approved ❌
- Initialized → Finalized ❌

#### Structs

> The smart contract will have the following structs :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The smart contract will have the following structs:
```

> - `Retired`: to store the details of retired and approver addresses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Retired`: to represent the details of retired and approver addresses.
```

> - `Newbie`: to store newbie and amount.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Newbie`: to represent newbies and their amount.
```

#### Storage

The smart contract will have the following storage variables:

> - `retirees`: array of retirees structs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `retirees`: an array of the `Retired` struct.
```

> - `newbie`: array of newbies structs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `newbies`: an array of the `Newbie` struct.
```

- `status`: current status of the contract.

> - `rebalanceBlockNumber`: Block number of the execution of rebalancing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `rebalanceBlockNumber`: the target block number of the execution of rebalancing.
```

> - `memo`: result of the treasury fund rebalance.

Reviewer: What does the memo look like? it seems a string, then we can specify some strings of this memo.

#### Modifiers

The smart contract will have the following modifier:

> - `atStatus`: to restrict access to certain functions based on the current status of the contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `onlyAtStatus`: to restrict access to certain functions based on the current status of the contract. If the status is not the same with the given status, it reverts.
```

#### Constructor

The smart contract will have the following constructor:

> - `constructor`: to initialize the contract with the block number of the execution of re balance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `constructor`: to initialize the contract with the target block number of the execution of rebalance.
```

#### State Changing Functions

The smart contract will have the following state changing functions:

> - `registerRetired`: to register retired details. Retired stores the retired address and approvers

Reviewer: @aidan-kwon @toniya-klaytn 
Do we have to forbid the permission of registering retired addresses? what if a crazy guy executes the transaction with unknown address?

Author: yes this function is restricted to onlyOwner and the `approve` function verifies the msg.sender. So crazy guy cannot execute the transaction.

Reviewer: @toniya-klaytn Got it. :) Thanks for the answer.

> - `removeNewbie`: to remove retired details from the array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `removeRetired`: to remove retired details from the array.
```

> - `registerRetired`: to register newbie address and its fund distribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `registerNewbie`: to register newbie address and its fund distribution.
```

- `removeNewbie`: to remove newbie details from the array.
- `finalizeRegistration`: sets the status to Registered only executed by owner. After this stage, registrations will be restricted.
- `approve`: to approve a retiredAddress by the admin.
- `finalizeApproval`: sets the status to Approved. After this stage, approvals will be restricted.
  </br>
  **Conditions**
  - every retired must be approved
  - min required admin’s approval is done for retired contract address.

>   - sum of retired’s balance is greater than treasury amount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - sum of retired’s balance is greater than sum of the newbies' amount
```

    </br>
- `reset`: resets all storage values to empty objects except rebalanceBlockNumber. It can only be called during Initialization, Registration and Approved status.
- `finalizeContract`: to record the execution result of the rebalance and finalize the contract. The storage data cannot be modified after this stage.

#### Fallback Function

> The smart contract will have a fallback function to revert any payments. Since its a treasury contract it should not accept any payments nor it should allow any withdrawal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The smart contract will have a fallback function to revert any payments. Since its a treasury contract, it should not accept any payments nor it should allow any withdrawal.
```

### Core Logic Overview

TBU - describe how to read contract data and execute rebalancing in Klaytn node

## Rationale

<!--The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages. The rationale may also provide evidence of consensus within the community, and should discuss important objections or concerns raised during discussion.-->

The smart contract is mainly for recording the details, and the Core will execute the fund re-distributions.

### Design decision

#### KLAY transfer is not allowed via smart contracts

> As the balance of treasury funds keeps increasing for every block with the block reward its hard to keep track of the balances and rebalance token allocation. So smart contract will only record the rebalanced allocation and the core will execute the allocation reading from the contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the balance of treasury funds keeps increasing for every block with the block reward its hard to keep track of the balances and rebalance token allocation. So smart contract will only record the rebalanced allocation and the core will execute the allocation by reading from the contract.
```

#### Approval of retiredAddress

> To record the addresses in a verifiable manner the addresses are verified in the contract by calling approve method. The retiredAddress can be a Contract address or a Externally Owned Account. If the retired address is a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To record the addresses in a verifiable manner, the addresses are verified in the contract by calling approve method. The retiredAddress can be a Contract address or an Externally Owned Account. If the retired address is a
```

Reviewer: Sentence is broken.

Author: fixed

## Backwards Compatibility

<!-- All KIPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The KIP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. KIP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright. The authors should answer the question: "Does this KIP require a hard fork?" -->

- The foundation should deploy new TreasuryRebalance contract to record the token redistribution.
- To rebalance the funds and redistribute in a consistent manner the foundation should burn the designated funds before re-distribution.
- This does not affect the backward compatibility as this a newly dpeloyed contract

## Implementation

<!--The implementations must be completed before any KIP is given status "Final", but it need not be completed before the KIP is accepted. While there is merit to the approach of reaching consensus on the specification and rationale before writing code, the principle of "rough consensus and running code" is still useful when it comes to resolving many discussions of API details.-->

> #### Example implementation

Reviewer: @toniya-klaytn It would be good to have an interface of this specification rather than showing whole implementation.

Author: Shall I remove the implementation and add a interface ?

Reviewer: Either is okay.

1. At least we have an interface because we are basically dealing with the standard interface. Implementation can be changed afterwards.
2. If we wanna add implementation, it could be good to add a link of real implementation like a link to the file in some github repo. Or, it also would be good to add a reference implementation in this document.

Author: Added the interface. The implementation link can be added once the code is merged in Klaytn [repo](https://github.com/klaytn/klaytn/pull/1803).

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0

pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

import "./Ownable.sol";

/**
 * @title Smart contract to record the rebalance of treasury funds.
 * This contract is to mainly record the addresses which holds the treasury funds
 * before and after rebalancing. It facilates approval and redistributing to new addresses.

>  * Core will execute the re-distribution reading from this contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Core will execute the re-distribution by reading this contract.
```

 */
contract TreasuryRebalance is Ownable {
    /**
     *  Enums to track the status of the contract
     */
    enum Status {
        Initialized,
        Registered,
        Approved,
        Finalized
    }

    /**

>      * Retired struct to store the details of retired and approver addresses

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     * Retired struct to store retired addresses and their approver addresses
```

     */
    struct Retired {
        address retired;
        address[] approvers;
    }

    /**

>      * Newbie struct to store reciever and amount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     * Newbie struct to store receiver addresses and their amount
```

     */
    struct Newbie {
        address newbie;
        uint256 amount;
    }

    /**
     * Storage
     */

>     Retired[] public retirees; //array of retired structs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Retired[] public retirees; // array of the Retired struct
```

    Newbie[] public newbies; //array of newbie structs
    Status public status; //current status of the contract
    uint256 public rebalanceBlockNumber; //Block number of the execution of rebalancing
    string public memo; //result of the treasury fund rebalance

    /**
     * Events logs
     */

>     event DeployContract(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    event ContractDeployed(
```

        Status status,
        uint256 rebalanceBlockNumber,
        uint256 deployedBlockNumber
    );

>     event RegisterRetired(address retired, address[] approvers);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    event RetiredRegistered(address retired, address[] approvers);
```

>     event RemoveRetired(address retired, uint256 retiredCount);
>     event RegisterNewbie(address newbie, uint256 fundAllocation);
>     event RemoveNewbie(address newbie, uint256 newbieCount);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    event RetiredRemoved(address retired, uint256 retiredCount);
    event NewbieRegistered(address newbie, uint256 fundAllocation);
    event NewbieRemoved(address newbie, uint256 newbieCount);
```

>     event GetState(bool success, bytes result);

Reviewer: Why do we need to have GetState event? Isn't this a read operation?

Author: Yes but this is read from another contract, so it would be good to log the results. Isn't ?

Reviewer: @toniya-klaytn But it is little bit weird to use the name `GetState`. If you want to log the result of calling getstate() function, we can use other names like `RetiredAddressAdminStatus`.

Author: updated to `RetiredAddrAdminStatus` instead of `RetiredAddressAdminStatus` as too long

>     event Approve(address retired, address approver, uint256 approversCount);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    event Approved(address retired, address approver, uint256 approversCount);
```

>     event SetStatus(Status status);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    event StatusChanged(Status status);
```

Author: updated

    event Finalized(string memo, Status status);

    /**
     * Modifiers
     */
    modifier onlyAtStatus(Status _status) {

>         require(status == _status, "function not allowed at this stage");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        require(status == _status, "Not in the designated status");
```

Author: updated

        _;
    }

    /**
     *  Constructor
     * @param _rebalanceBlockNumber is the target block number to execute the redistribution in Core
     */
    constructor(uint256 _rebalanceBlockNumber) {
        rebalanceBlockNumber = _rebalanceBlockNumber;
        status = Status.Initialized;

>         emit DeployContract(status, _rebalanceBlockNumber, block.timestamp);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        emit ContractDeployed(status, _rebalanceBlockNumber, block.timestamp);
```

     * @return isAdmin is true if the msg.sender is one of the admin
     */
    function _validateAdmin(
        address _retiredAddress,
        address _approver
    ) private returns (bool isAdmin) {
        (address[] memory adminList, ) = _getState(_retiredAddress);
        require(adminList.length != 0, "admin list cannot be empty");
        for (uint8 i = 0; i < adminList.length; i++) {
            if (_approver == adminList[i]) {
                isAdmin = true;
            }
        }
    }

    /**
     * @dev gets the adminList and quorom by calling `getState()` method in retiredAddress contract
     * @param _retiredAddress is the address of the contract
     * @return adminList list of the retiredAddress contract admins
     * @return req min required number of approvals
     */
    function _getState(
        address _retiredAddress
    ) private returns (address[] memory adminList, uint256 req) {
        //call getState() function in retiredAddress contract to get the adminList
        bytes memory payload = abi.encodeWithSignature("getState()");
        (bool success, bytes memory result) = _retiredAddress.staticcall(
            payload
        );

>         emit GetState(success, result);

Reviewer: I think this is not useful, because if success==false, this event will not emitted because the transaction will fail.

Author: But if success=true, It would good to log the result which is the adminList which might be helpful for debugging

Reviewer: @toniya-klaytn Yes, for that reason, it could be better to make it more precise, like RetiredAddrAdminStatus. I think this already changed as we discussed. I will make this conversation as resolved.

        require(success, "call failed");

        (adminList, req) = abi.decode(result, (address[], uint256));
    }

    /**
     * @dev Internal function to update the approver details of a retired
     * _retiredAddress is the address of the retired
     * _approver is the admin of the retiredAddress
     */
    function _updateApprover(
        address _retiredAddress,
        address _approver
    ) private {
        uint256 index = getRetiredIndex(_retiredAddress);
        address[] memory approvers = retirees[index].approvers;
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < approvers.length; i++) {
            require(
                approvers[i] != _approver,

>                 "Duplicate approvers cannot be allowed"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                "Already approved"
```

            );
        }
        retirees[index].approvers.push(_approver);
        emit Approved(
            _retiredAddress,
            _approver,
            retirees[index].approvers.length
        );
    }

    /**
     * @dev finalizeRegistration sets the status to Registered,
     *      After this stage, registrations will be restricted.
     */
    function finalizeRegistration()
        public
        onlyOwner
        onlyAtStatus(Status.Initialized)

>     {

Reviewer: Who calls this function? by core or by owner?
If it is called by owner, don't we need to validate whether we can finalize it or not?

Author: It is called by owner.  How can we finalize whether registration is complete ? @aidan-kwon

        status = Status.Registered;
        emit SetStatus(status);
    }

    /**
     * @dev finalizeApproval sets the status to Approved,
     *      After this stage, approvals will be restricted.
     */
    function finalizeApproval() public onlyOwner onlyAtStatus(Status.Registered) {
        require(
            getTreasuryAmount() < sumOfRetiredBalance(),
            "treasury amount should be less than the sum of all retired address balances"
        );
        _isRetiredsApproved();
        status = Status.Approved;
        emit SetStatus(status);
    }

    /**
     * @dev verify if quorom reached for the retired approvals
     */
    function _isRetiredsApproved() private {
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < retirees.length; i++) {
            Retired memory retired = retirees[i];
            (, uint256 req) = _getState(retired.retired);
            if (retired.approvers.length >= req) {
                //if min quorom reached, make sure all approvers are still valid
                address[] memory approvers = retired.approvers;
                uint256 minApprovals = 0;
                for (uint256 j = 0; j < approvers.length; j++) {

>                     _validateAdmin(retirees[i].retired, approvers[j]);

Reviewer: I think we can optimize this statement. In this function, it also calls _getState() to get admin addresses. Do we need to call _getState() multiple times?

Author: Optimised it by removing the `_getState` method from the  _validateAdmin function. So it wont be called twice.

        );

        //`delete` keyword is used to set a storage variable or a dynamic array to its default value.
        delete retirees;
        delete newbies;
        delete memo;
        status = Status.Initialized;
    }

    //Getters
    /**
     * @dev to get retired details by retiredAddress
     * @param _retiredAddress is the address of the retired
     */
    function getRetired(
        address _retiredAddress
    ) public view returns (address, address[] memory) {
        require(retiredExists(_retiredAddress), "Retired does not exist");
        uint256 index = getRetiredIndex(_retiredAddress);
        Retired memory retired = retirees[index];
        return (retired.retired, retired.approvers);
    }

    /**
     * @dev check whether retiredAddress is registered
     * @param _retiredAddress is the address of the retired
     */
    function retiredExists(address _retiredAddress) public view returns (bool) {
        require(_retiredAddress != address(0), "Invalid address");
        for (uint8 i = 0; i < retirees.length; i++) {
            if (retirees[i].retired == _retiredAddress) {
                return true;
            }
        }

>     }

Reviewer: Don't we need to have `return false` here?

Author: solidity returns false be default

    /**
     * @dev get index of the retired in the retirees array
     * @param _retiredAddress is the address of the retired
     */
    function getRetiredIndex(
        address _retiredAddress
    ) public view returns (uint256) {
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < retirees.length; i++) {
            if (retirees[i].retired == _retiredAddress) {
                return i;
            }
        }

>         revert("Retired does not exist");

Reviewer: Since this is a view function, we don't need to have revert here. return something is enough like -1 (UINT256_MAX)

Author: fixed

    }

    /**
     * @dev to calculate the sum of retirees balances
     * @return retireesBalance the sum of balances of retireds
     */
    function sumOfRetiredBalance() public view returns (uint256 retireesBalance) {

>         for (uint8 i = 0; i < retirees.length; i++) {

Reviewer: This might be not a big deal, but if you want to use uint8, you need to limit the length of this array less than uint8_max.

Reviewer: Also there is some inconsistencies of using index of this array.

https://github.com/klaytn/kips/pull/104/files#diff-ab7a71791e7f914861f0980b3c2d95e2d5794bf10bc2548647a8fcc6d25cddbfR272

https://github.com/klaytn/kips/pull/104/files#diff-ab7a71791e7f914861f0980b3c2d95e2d5794bf10bc2548647a8fcc6d25cddbfR526-R528

Author: fixed uint inconsistencies

>             address retiredAddress = retirees[i].retired;

Reviewer: I think we don't need to have this statement.

Author: added this for more readability. 
It can also be a single line 
```
retireesBalance += retirees[i].retired.balance;
```

            retireesBalance += retiredAddress.balance;
        }
        return retireesBalance;
    }

    /**
     * @dev to get newbie details by newbieAddress
     * @param _newbieAddress is the address of the newbie
     * @return newbie is the address of the newbie
     * @return amount is the fund allocated to the newbie

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: unnecessary blank line.

     */
    function getNewbie(
        address _newbieAddress
    ) public view returns (address, uint256) {
        require(newbieExists(_newbieAddress), "Newbie does not exist");

>         uint256 index = getNewbieIndex(_newbieAddress);

Reviewer: Why do we need to have same iterations in the two functions?
If we get wrong index, we are able to know that newbie does not exist.

Author: Removed unnecessary checks.

     */
    function getNewbieIndex(
        address _newbieAddress
    ) public view returns (uint256) {
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < newbies.length; i++) {
            if (newbies[i].newbie == _newbieAddress) {
                return i;
            }
        }
        revert("Newbie does not exist");
    }

    /**
     * @dev to calculate the sum of newbie funds
     * @return treasuryAmount the sum of funds allocated to newbies
     */
    function getTreasuryAmount() public view returns (uint256 treasuryAmount) {
        for (uint8 i = 0; i < newbies.length; i++) {
            treasuryAmount += newbies[i].amount;
        }
        return treasuryAmount;
    }

    /**
     * @dev gets the length of retirees list
     */
    function getRetiredCount() public view returns (uint256) {
        return retirees.length;
    }

    /**
     * @dev gets the length of newbies list
     */
    function getNewbieCount() public view returns (uint256) {
        return newbies.length;
    }

    /**
     * @dev allback function to revert any payments
     */
    fallback() external payable {
        revert("This contract does not accept any payments");
    }

> 

Reviewer: it would be good to have a function that returns all the retired and newbie addresses when the status is finalized. It is useful for ecosystem service providers like scope and finder.

Author: like getting the senders and receivers in the txn receipt ?
```
function finalizeContract( string memory _memo)
        public
        onlyOwner
        onlyAtStatus(Status.Approved)
        returns (address[] memory retirees, address[] memory newbies)
 ```

Reviewer: yes, with the balances.

Author: added

Reviewer: Ah, sorry for that. I misunderstood. My intention is that it could be good to have a view function that anyone can call this contract to get the all information about the retirees and newbies. If we just make a receipt, it is not easy to read. To get the value afterwards, we need to know the exact block number to get the receipt.

Author: We have separate getter function for retired and newbie 
https://github.com/klaytn/treasury-rebalance/blob/main/contracts/TreasuryRebalance.sol#L370. 

Do we need one function to view all the values like ?
```
function getSnapshot() public view returns(
            address[] memory retirees, 
            uint256 totalRetireesBalance,
            address[] memory newbies,
            uint256 totalNewbiesFund, 
            Status status) 
 {
 }
 ```

Reviewer: @toniya-klaytn Yes, this is the one that I wanted. I haven't seen that before.

---
kip: 103
title: Treasury Fund Rebalancing

> author: Aidan<aidan.kwon@klaytn.foundation>, Toniya<toniya.sun@klaytn.foundation>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: Aidan (@aidan-kwon), Toniya (@toniya-klaytn)
```

It could be better to use github id instead of email. As we all know it is very high chance to change your email compared to github id.

discussions-to: https://govforum.klaytn.foundation/t/kgp-6-proposal-to-establish-a-sustainable-and-verifiable-klay-token-economy/157
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-02-24
---

## Simple Summary

<!--"If you can't explain it simply, you don't understand it well enough." Provide a simplified and layman-accessible explanation of the KIP.-->

> This proposal suggests the creation of a smart contract that records the rebalance of treasury funds. The main objective is to facilitate the approval and redistribution of treasury funds to new addresses while keeping record of the sender and receiver details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal suggests a smart contract interface standard that records the rebalance of treasury funds. The main objective is to facilitate the approval and redistribution of treasury funds to new addresses while keeping record of the sender and receiver details.
```

Reviewer: @aidan-kwon Does this KIP covers only smart contract part? What about the core part of how we can access and process the information?

Reviewer 3: Yes, core part will be added briefly. There are some validation that can cancel the rebalancing, so everyone should know about the detail. I will update it soon with implementation of Klaytn repo.

## Specification

<!--The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations for any of the current Klaytn platforms (klaytn). -->

The proposed smart contract will be implemented in Solidity and will be compatible with the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM). The smart contract will use the `@klaytn/contracts` Ownable contract to restrict access to certain functions to the owner of the contract.

The smart contract will have the following features:

- Add/Remove fund addresses
- Approve fund addresses and fund allocation
- Reset the storage values at any unforeseen circumstances before Finalized
- Finalize the smart contract after execution

### Smart Contracts Overview

#### Enums

The smart contract will have the following enum to track the status of the contract:

- `Initialized - 0`: The initial state of the contract.
- `Registered - 1`: Senders and receivers registered.

> - `Approved - 2`: Senders approved.

Reviewer: @toniya-klaytn When the status is changed? after all senders approved?

Author: Yes when all senders is approved by the min required admins if sender is a contract address

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Approved - 2`: All senders approved.
```

> - `isApproved - 2`: Senders approved.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `Approved - 2`: Senders approved.
```

- `Finalized - 3`: Rebalance executed and finalized.

#### Life Cycle

The contract status should follow the ENUM order above during status change. The only way to go to previous state is by calling Reset() function.

![](../assets/kip-103/lifecycle.png)

Status transition

- Initialized → Registered → Approved → Finalized ✅
- Initialized → Registered → Finalized ❌
- Initialized → Approved ❌
- Initialized → Finalized ❌

#### Structs

The smart contract will have the following structs :

- `Sender`: to store the details of sender and approver addresses.

> - `Receiver`: to store receiver and amount.

Reviewer 3: We may find a better name for treasury accounts. 
My random idea is "demolition/establishment"

Author: How about sourceFund and destinationFund ?

Author: renamed sender and receiver => retired and newbie.

        for (uint8 i = 0; i < receivers.length; i++) {
            treasuryAmount += receivers[i].amount;
        }
        return treasuryAmount;
    }

    /**
     * @dev gets the length of senders list
     */
    function getSenderCount() public view returns (uint256) {
        return senders.length;
    }

    /**
     * @dev gets the length of receivers list
     */
    function getReceiverCount() public view returns (uint256) {
        return receivers.length;
    }

    /**
     * @dev allback function to revert any payments
     */
    fallback() external payable {
        revert("This contract does not accept any payments");
    }

    /**
     * @dev Helper function to check the address is contract addr or EOA
     */
    function isContractAddr(address _addr) public view returns (bool) {
        uint256 size;
        assembly {
            size := extcodesize(_addr)
        }
        return size > 0;
    }
}
```

## Test Cases

<!--Test cases for an implementation are mandatory for KIPs that are affecting consensus changes. Other KIPs can choose to include links to test cases if applicable.-->

> https://github.com/Krustuniverse-Klaytn-Group/treasury-rebalance/blob/dev/test/TreasuryRebalance.js

Reviewer 4: Will this repo be open to public?

Author: no this wont be open to public. 
@aidan-kwon  Can we make the smart contract repository public ?

Reviewer: If this will not be public, there is no reason to add this here. Since this KIPs repo is a public repo. A public repo with a private link?

Author: made the repo to public and changed the link

The proposed smart contract will be implemented in Solidity and will be compatible with the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM). The smart contract will use Ownable contract to restrict access to certain functions to the owner of the contract.

The smart contract will have the following features:

- Register/Remove fund addresses
- Approve fund addresses and fund allocation
- Reset the storage values at any unforeseen circumstances before Finalized
- Finalize the smart contract after execution

### Smart Contracts Overview

#### Enums

The smart contract will have the following enum to track the status of the contract:

- `Initialized - 0`: The initial state of the contract.
- `Registered - 1`: Retirees and Newbies are registered.
- `Approved - 2`: All retirees approved by msg.sender
- `Finalized - 3`: Rebalance executed and finalized.

#### Life Cycle

The contract status should follow the ENUM order above during status transition. The only way to go to previous state is by calling Reset() function.

![](../assets/kip-103/lifecycle.png)

Status transition

> - Initialized → Registered → Approved → Finalized ✅

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Initialized → Registered → Approved → Finalized ✅
- Initialized, Registered, Approved → Initialized, when `reset()` is called.
```

The smart contract is mainly for recording the details, and the Core will execute the fund re-distributions.

### Design decision

#### KLAY transfer is not allowed via smart contracts

As the balance of treasury funds keeps increasing for every block with the block reward its hard to keep track of the balances and rebalance token allocation. So smart contract will only record the rebalanced allocation and the core will execute the allocation reading from the contract.

#### Approval of retiredAddress

To record the addresses in a verifiable manner the addresses are verified in the contract by calling approve method. The retiredAddress can be a Contract address or a Externally Owned Account. If the retired address is a

- EOA : EOA address can be verified when the account holder directly calls the approve function. `msg.sender == retiredAddress`

> - Contract : Contract address can be verified when the admin of the contract calls approve function. The smart contract calls the `getState()` function implemented in the retiredAddress contract to get the admin details. `msg.sender == admin`

Reviewer: It would be good to define interface with `getState()` to inform the return values of the function.

  - `getState()` funtion is implemented in Klaytn treasury contracts. It returns the adminList and quorom (min required admins to approve).
  - Condition: Min required admins should approve the senderAddress contract.

#### No Withdrawal

> Smart contract is not allowed to receive KLAY due to security reasons. So any funds send the contract will be reverted and withdraw function is not implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart contract is not allowed to receive KLAY due to security reasons. So any transaction sending KLAY to the contract will be reverted and withdraw function is not implemented.
```

#### Finalize Contract

Once the re-distribution a.k.a rebalance is executed by the Core, the status of the smart contract will be finalized and any modifications to the storage data will be restricted.

## Backwards Compatibility

<!-- All KIPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The KIP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. KIP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright. The authors should answer the question: "Does this KIP require a hard fork?" -->

- The foundation should deploy new TreasuryRebalance contract to record the token redistribution.

> - To rebalance the funds and redistribute in a consistent manner the foundation should burn the designated funds before re-distribution.

Reviewer: I don't understand why we need this statement. Can you explain little bit more on this?

Author: By default retirees address balances will be greater than newbies allocated funds (treasury fund). So its necessary to burn funds which is greater than treasury funds.

Reviewer: > the foundation should burn the designated funds before re-distribution.

Is this right sentence? We will not burn explicitly AFAIK. Re-distribution and burn will be performed in the same hard-fork block.

Author: cc: @aidan-kwon

Reviewer 3: @kjhman21 's sentence is correct. The reminder will be burnt at the same time of re-distribution. 
Refrer this: 
https://github.com/klaytn/klaytn/blob/21239e7f542da3418085051a0159f4ea5cd8b5e8/consensus/istanbul/backend/kip103.go#L161-L176

    event RetiredRemoved(address retired, uint256 retiredCount);
    event NewbieRegistered(address newbie, uint256 fundAllocation);
    event NewbieRemoved(address newbie, uint256 newbieCount);
    event Approved(address retired, address approver, uint256 approversCount);
    event Finalized(string memo);

    // Enums
    enum Status {
        Initialized,
        Registered,
        Approved,
        Finalized
    }

    struct Retired {
        address retired;
        address[] approvers;
    }

    struct Newbie {
        address newbie;
        uint256 amount;
    }

    // State variables
    function status() external view returns (Status);
    function rebalanceBlockNumber() external view returns (uint256);
    function memo() external view returns (string memory);

    // State changing functions
    function registerRetired(address retiredAddress) external;
    function removeRetired(address retiredAddress) external;
    function registerNewbie(address newbieAddress, uint256 _amount) external;
    function removeNewbie(address newbieAddress) external;
    function approve(address retiredAddress) external;

>     function finalizeRegistration(Status newStatus) external;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    function finalizeRegistration() external;
```

seems like no param?
 https://github.com/klaytn/kips/pull/104/files#diff-ab7a71791e7f914861f0980b3c2d95e2d5794bf10bc2548647a8fcc6d25cddbfR468

>     function finalizeApproval(Status newStatus) external;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    function finalizeApproval() external;
```

seems like no params?
https://github.com/klaytn/kips/pull/104/files#diff-ab7a71791e7f914861f0980b3c2d95e2d5794bf10bc2548647a8fcc6d25cddbfR481

     */
    constructor(uint256 _rebalanceBlockNumber) {
        rebalanceBlockNumber = _rebalanceBlockNumber;
        status = Status.Initialized;
        emit ContractDeployed(status, _rebalanceBlockNumber, block.timestamp);
    }

    //State changing Functions
    /**
     * @dev registers retired details
     * @param _retiredAddress is the address of the retired
     */
    function registerRetired(
        address _retiredAddress
    ) public onlyOwner onlyAtStatus(Status.Initialized) {
        require(
            !retiredExists(_retiredAddress),
            "Retired address is already registered"
        );
        Retired storage retired = retirees.push();
        retired.retired = _retiredAddress;
        emit RetiredRegistered(retired.retired, retired.approvers);
    }

    /**
     * @dev remove the retired details from the array
     * @param _retiredAddress is the address of the retired
     */
    function removeRetired(
        address _retiredAddress
    ) public onlyOwner onlyAtStatus(Status.Initialized) {
        uint256 retiredIndex = getRetiredIndex(_retiredAddress);

>         retirees[retiredIndex] = retirees[retirees.length - 1];

Reviewer: We need to check if retiredIndex == type(uint256).max

Author: added checks

        retirees.pop();

        emit RetiredRemoved(_retiredAddress, retirees.length);
    }

    /**
     * @dev registers newbie address and its fund distribution
     * @param _newbieAddress is the address of the newbie
     * @param _amount is the fund to be allocated to the newbie
     */
    function registerNewbie(
        address _newbieAddress,
        uint256 _amount
    ) public onlyOwner onlyAtStatus(Status.Initialized) {
        require(
            !newbieExists(_newbieAddress),
            "Newbie address is already registered"
        );
        require(_amount != 0, "Amount cannot be set to 0");

        Newbie memory newbie = Newbie(_newbieAddress, _amount);
        newbies.push(newbie);

        emit NewbieRegistered(_newbieAddress, _amount);
    }

    /**
     * @dev remove the newbie details from the array
     * @param _newbieAddress is the address of the newbie
     */
    function removeNewbie(
        address _newbieAddress
    ) public onlyOwner onlyAtStatus(Status.Initialized) {

>         uint256 newbieIndex = getNewbieIndex(_newbieAddress);

Reviewer: need to check if newbieIndex == type(uint256).max

Author: added checks

            "retired needs to be registered before approval"
        );

        //Check whether the retired address is EOA or contract address
        bool isContract = isContractAddr(_retiredAddress);
        if (!isContract) {
            //check whether the msg.sender is the retired if its a EOA
            require(
                msg.sender == _retiredAddress,
                "retiredAddress is not the msg.sender"
            );
            _updateApprover(_retiredAddress, msg.sender);
        } else {
            (address[] memory adminList, ) = _getState(_retiredAddress);
            require(adminList.length != 0, "admin list cannot be empty");

            //check if the msg.sender is one of the admin of the retiredAddress contract
            require(
                _validateAdmin(msg.sender, adminList),
                "msg.sender is not the admin"
            );
            _updateApprover(_retiredAddress, msg.sender);
        }
    }

    /**
     * @dev validate if the msg.sender is admin if the retiredAddress is a contract
     * @param _approver is the msg.sender
     * @return isAdmin is true if the msg.sender is one of the admin
     */

>     function _validateAdmin(

Reviewer: can we make this function as a view function?

Author: Done

        address _approver,
        address[] memory adminList
    ) private returns (bool isAdmin) {
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < adminList.length; i++) {
            if (_approver == adminList[i]) {
                isAdmin = true;
            }
        }
    }

    /**
     * @dev gets the adminList and quorom by calling `getState()` method in retiredAddress contract
     * @param _retiredAddress is the address of the contract
     * @return adminList list of the retiredAddress contract admins
     * @return req min required number of approvals
     */
    function _getState(
        address _retiredAddress
    ) private returns (address[] memory adminList, uint256 req) {
        //call getState() function in retiredAddress contract to get the adminList

>         bytes memory payload = abi.encodeWithSignature("getState()");

Reviewer: If we define an interface for this `getState()`, couldn't it be more readable?

Author: added a interface

        }
        retirees[index].approvers.push(_approver);
        emit Approved(
            _retiredAddress,
            _approver,
            retirees[index].approvers.length
        );
    }

    /**
     * @dev finalizeRegistration sets the status to Registered,
     *      After this stage, registrations will be restricted.
     */
    function finalizeRegistration()
        public
        onlyOwner
        onlyAtStatus(Status.Initialized)
    {
        status = Status.Registered;
        emit StatusChanged(status);
    }

    /**
     * @dev finalizeApproval sets the status to Approved,
     *      After this stage, approvals will be restricted.
     */
    function finalizeApproval()
        public
        onlyOwner
        onlyAtStatus(Status.Registered)
    {
        require(
            getTreasuryAmount() < sumOfRetiredBalance(),
            "treasury amount should be less than the sum of all retired address balances"
        );
        _isRetiredsApproved();
        status = Status.Approved;
        emit StatusChanged(status);
    }

    /**
     * @dev verify if quorom reached for the retired approvals
     */

>     function _isRetiredsApproved() private {

Reviewer: Can we make this function as a view function since it does not update any storage..?

Author: changed

        string memory _memo
    )
        public
        onlyOwner
        onlyAtStatus(Status.Approved)
        returns (address[] memory retirees, address[] memory newbies)
    {
        memo = _memo;
        status = Status.Finalized;
        emit Finalized(memo, status);
        return (retirees, newbies);
    }

    /**
     * @dev resets all storage values to empty objects except targetBlockNumber
     */
    function reset() public onlyOwner {
        //reset cannot be called at Finalized status or after target block.number
        require(
            ((status != Status.Finalized) &&
                (block.number < rebalanceBlockNumber)),
            "Contract is finalized, cannot reset values"
        );

        //`delete` keyword is used to set a storage variable or a dynamic array to its default value.
        delete retirees;
        delete newbies;
        delete memo;
        status = Status.Initialized;
    }

    //Getters
    /**
     * @dev to get retired details by retiredAddress
     * @param _retiredAddress is the address of the retired
     */
    function getRetired(
        address _retiredAddress
    ) public view returns (address, address[] memory) {

>         uint256 index = getRetiredIndex(_retiredAddress);

Reviewer: need to check the existence of retired

Author: added checks

    }

    /**
     * @dev get index of the retired in the retirees array
     * @param _retiredAddress is the address of the retired
     */
    function getRetiredIndex(
        address _retiredAddress
    ) public view returns (uint256) {
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < retirees.length; i++) {
            if (retirees[i].retired == _retiredAddress) {
                return i;
            }
        }
        return type(uint256).max;
    }

    /**
     * @dev to calculate the sum of retirees balances
     * @return retireesBalance the sum of balances of retireds
     */
    function sumOfRetiredBalance()
        public
        view
        returns (uint256 retireesBalance)
    {
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < retirees.length; i++) {
            retireesBalance += retirees[i].retired.balance;
        }
        return retireesBalance;
    }

    /**
     * @dev to get newbie details by newbieAddress
     * @param _newbieAddress is the address of the newbie
     * @return newbie is the address of the newbie
     * @return amount is the fund allocated to the newbie
     */
    function getNewbie(
        address _newbieAddress
    ) public view returns (address, uint256) {

>         uint256 index = getNewbieIndex(_newbieAddress);

Reviewer: need to check out of index.

Author: added checks

---
kip: 103
title: Treasury Fund Rebalancing
author: Aidan (@aidan-kwon), Toniya (@toniya-klaytn)
discussions-to: https://govforum.klaytn.foundation/t/kgp-6-proposal-to-establish-a-sustainable-and-verifiable-klay-token-economy/157
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-02-24
---

## Simple Summary

<!--"If you can't explain it simply, you don't understand it well enough." Provide a simplified and layman-accessible explanation of the KIP.-->

> This proposal suggests a smart contract interface standard that records the rebalance of treasury funds. The main objective is to facilitate the approval and redistribution of treasury funds to new addresses while keeping record of the Retired and Newbie details.

Reviewer 5: The explanation seems unclear.
What do Retired and Newbie stand for?
Does 'retired' represent 'previous fund account' such as KGF or KIR, and 'Newbie' represents 'rebalanced fund' such as KCF or KFF?
Or how about do not write 'Retired' and 'Newbie' at simple summary?

Author: yes, 'retired' represent 'previous fund account' such as KGF or KIR, and 'Newbie' represents 'rebalanced fund' such as KCF or KFF. As suggested, will to keep it simple will refactor to 
```
The main objective is to facilitate the approval and redistribution of treasury funds to new addresses while keeping record of the previous fund addresses.
```

## Abstract

<!--A short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.-->

> Organizations need to manage treasury funds in a transparent and accountable manner. The proposed standard aims to make the management of treasury funds more transparent by recording the rebalance of treasury funds. The smart contract will keep records of the addresses which hold the treasury funds before and after rebalancing. It also facilates approval before execution.

Reviewer 5: Could you please write when and how the records in the contract are used?
Is this just for record purposes? Without the transfer of KLAY?

Author: Yes this is to only for record purpose

Transparency is the one of most important aspect of blockchain. It is important to ensure that treasury funds are allocated and managed in a transparent and verifiable manner. The proposed smart contract aims to disclose the management of treasury funds in a transparent manner through smart contracts reducing the risk of errors and mismanagement. By providing transparency and accountability in the allocation and management of funds, the smart contract can help to build trust and confidence among stakeholders.

## Specification

<!--The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations for any of the current Klaytn platforms (klaytn). -->

The proposed smart contract will be implemented in Solidity and will be compatible with the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM). The smart contract will use Ownable contract to restrict access to certain functions to the owner of the contract.

The smart contract will have the following features:

> - Register/Remove fund addresses

Reviewer 5: What is the fund addresses? Is it previous fund accounts to be rebalanced such as KGF or KIR?
Could you please write a little bit more detail?

Author: Sure, added

> - Approve fund addresses and fund allocation

Reviewer 5: Is it means 'receive approval for asset transfer from the owners of the funds'?

Author: yes, will add more details here

- Reset the storage values at any unforeseen circumstances before Finalized
- Finalize the smart contract after execution

### Smart Contracts Overview

#### Enums

The smart contract will have the following enum to track the status of the contract:

- `Initialized - 0`: The initial state of the contract.
- `Registered - 1`: Retirees and Newbies are registered.
- `Approved - 2`: All retirees approved by msg.sender
- `Finalized - 3`: Rebalance executed and finalized.

#### Life Cycle

The contract status should follow the ENUM order above during status transition. The only way to go to previous state is by calling Reset() function.

![](../assets/kip-103/lifecycle.png)

Status transition

- Initialized → Registered → Approved → Finalized ✅
- Initialized, Registered, Approved → Initialized, when `reset()` is called.
- Registered, Approved → Initialized, when `reset()` is called.

All other status transitions are not possible.

#### Structs

The smart contract will have the following structs:

> - `Retired`: to represent the details of retired and approver addresses.

Reviewer 5: I think the word 'Retired' is unclear. How about 'previousFundInfo' or 'pastFundInfo'?

Reviewer 5: Why don't you include String in this structure and put a brief description of what the fund is?

Author: Will add more desc in the comments instead of adding in the struct to avoid storage cost.

> - `Newbie`: to represent newbies and their fund allocation.

Reviewer 5: How about 'rebalancedFundInfo' or 'reallocatedFundInfo'?

- This does not affect the backward compatibility as this a newly dpeloyed contract

## Implementation

<!--The implementations must be completed before any KIP is given status "Final", but it need not be completed before the KIP is accepted. While there is merit to the approach of reaching consensus on the specification and rationale before writing code, the principle of "rough consensus and running code" is still useful when it comes to resolving many discussions of API details.-->

#### Example implementation

```solidity
interface ITreasuryRebalance {
    // Events
    event ContractDeployed(
        uint256 rebalanceBlockNumber,
        uint256 deployedBlockNumber
    );
    event RetiredRegistered(address retired, address[] approvers);
    event RetiredRemoved(address retired, uint256 retiredCount);
    event NewbieRegistered(address newbie, uint256 fundAllocation);
    event NewbieRemoved(address newbie, uint256 newbieCount);
    event Approved(address retired, address approver, uint256 approversCount);
    event StatusChanged(Status status);
    event Finalized(string memo);

> 

Reviewer 5: How about use 'indexed' at the events in order to make it easier to look up?

Author: As the length would be optimal in this contract it was not added. Good suggestion, thanks

    event Approved(address retired, address approver, uint256 approversCount);
    event StatusChanged(Status status);
    event Finalized(string memo, Status status);

    /**
     * Modifiers
     */
    modifier onlyAtStatus(Status _status) {
        require(status == _status, "Not in the designated status");
        _;
    }

    /**
     *  Constructor
     * @param _rebalanceBlockNumber is the target block number of the execution the rebalance in Core
     */
    constructor(uint256 _rebalanceBlockNumber) {
        rebalanceBlockNumber = _rebalanceBlockNumber;
        status = Status.Initialized;
        emit ContractDeployed(status, _rebalanceBlockNumber, block.timestamp);
    }

    //State changing Functions
    /**
     * @dev registers retired details
     * @param _retiredAddress is the address of the retired
     */
    function registerRetired(
        address _retiredAddress
    ) public onlyOwner onlyAtStatus(Status.Initialized) {
        require(
            !retiredExists(_retiredAddress),
            "Retired address is already registered"
        );
        Retired storage retired = retirees.push();
        retired.retired = _retiredAddress;

>         emit RetiredRegistered(retired.retired, retired.approvers);

Reviewer 5: At this point, approvers will always be 0, do we need to put them in the event RetiredRegistered?

Author: Makes sense

            _approver,
            retirees[index].approvers.length
        );
    }

    /**
     * @dev finalizeRegistration sets the status to Registered,
     *      After this stage, registrations will be restricted.
     */
    function finalizeRegistration()
        public
        onlyOwner
        onlyAtStatus(Status.Initialized)
    {
        status = Status.Registered;
        emit StatusChanged(status);
    }

    /**
     * @dev finalizeApproval sets the status to Approved,
     *      After this stage, approvals will be restricted.
     */
    function finalizeApproval()
        public
        onlyOwner
        onlyAtStatus(Status.Registered)
    {
        require(
            getTreasuryAmount() < sumOfRetiredBalance(),
            "treasury amount should be less than the sum of all retired address balances"
        );
        _isRetiredsApproved();
        status = Status.Approved;
        emit StatusChanged(status);
    }

    /**
     * @dev verify if quorom reached for the retired approvals
     */
    function _isRetiredsApproved() private view {
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < retirees.length; i++) {
            Retired memory retired = retirees[i];

>             (address[] memory adminList, uint256 req) = _getState(

Reviewer 5: If the retired account is EoA, shouldn't the function '_getState()' be executed and the req should be 1?

Author: Its already added!

        address _retiredAddress,
        address _approver
    ) private {
        uint256 index = getRetiredIndex(_retiredAddress);
        require(index != type(uint256).max, "Retired not registered");
        address[] memory approvers = retirees[index].approvers;
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < approvers.length; i++) {
            require(approvers[i] != _approver, "Already approved");
        }
        retirees[index].approvers.push(_approver);
        emit Approved(
            _retiredAddress,
            _approver,
            retirees[index].approvers.length
        );
    }

    /**
     * @dev finalizeRegistration sets the status to Registered,
     *      After this stage, registrations will be restricted.
     */
    function finalizeRegistration()
        public
        onlyOwner
        onlyAtStatus(Status.Initialized)
    {
        status = Status.Registered;
        emit StatusChanged(status);
    }

    /**
     * @dev finalizeApproval sets the status to Approved,
     *      After this stage, approvals will be restricted.
     */
    function finalizeApproval()
        public
        onlyOwner
        onlyAtStatus(Status.Registered)
    {
        require(

>             getTreasuryAmount() < sumOfRetiredBalance(),

Reviewer 5: Is there any possiblity that the two values are exactly same?

Author: No sum of retiredBalance should be greater in all cases as we are targeting to reduce the circulating supply of KLAY

Reviewer 5: I see. Thank you for your answer.

### Core Logic Overview

TBU - describe how to read contract data and execute rebalancing in Klaytn node

## Rationale

<!--The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages. The rationale may also provide evidence of consensus within the community, and should discuss important objections or concerns raised during discussion.-->

The smart contract is mainly for recording the details, and the Core will execute the fund re-distributions.

### Design decision

#### KLAY transfer is not allowed via smart contracts

As the balance of treasury funds keeps increasing for every block with the block reward its hard to keep track of the balances and rebalance token allocation. So smart contract will only record the rebalanced allocation and the core will execute the allocation by reading from the contract.

#### Approval of retiredAddress

> To record the addresses in a verifiable manner, the addresses are verified in the contract by calling approve method. The retiredAddress can either be a Contract address or an Externally Owned Account(EOA).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To record the addresses in a verifiable manner, the addresses are verified in the contract by calling approve method. The retiredAddress can either be a Contract Account (CA) or an Externally Owned Account(EOA).
```

                    address[] memory approvers = retired.approvers;
                    uint256 minApprovals = 0;
                    for (uint256 j = 0; j < approvers.length; j++) {
                        _validateAdmin(approvers[j], adminList);
                        minApprovals++;
                    }
                    require(
                        minApprovals >= req,
                        "min required admins should approve"
                    );
                } else {
                    revert("min required admins should approve");
                }
            }else {
                require(retired.approvers.length == 1 , "EOA should approve");
            }
        }
    }

    /**
     * @dev sets the status of the contract to Finalize. Once finalized the storage data
     * of the contract cannot be modified
     * @param _memo is the result of the rebalance after executing successfully in the core.
     * @return retirees is an array of retired address
     * @return totalRetireesBalance is the sum of all retired balances
     * @return newbies is an array of newbie address
     * @return totalNewbiesFund is the sum of funds allocated to
     */

>     function finalizeContract(

Reviewer: This function should be called by core.
@aidan-kwon Is there any mechanism that only core can call this function?

Reviewer 3: There is a way, but we try to avoid "write" function call from the core side. let me test and see

Reviewer: Okay, in this case we need to update the description and diagram.

    {
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < retirees.length; i++) {
            retireesBalance += retirees[i].retired.balance;
        }
        return retireesBalance;
    }

    /**
     * @dev to get newbie details by newbieAddress
     * @param _newbieAddress is the address of the newbie
     * @return newbie is the address of the newbie
     * @return amount is the fund allocated to the newbie
     */
    function getNewbie(
        address _newbieAddress
    ) public view returns (address, uint256) {
        uint256 index = getNewbieIndex(_newbieAddress);
        require(index != type(uint256).max, "Newbie not registered");
        Newbie memory newbie = newbies[index];
        return (newbie.newbie, newbie.amount);
    }

    /**
     * @dev check whether _newbieAddress is registered
     * @param _newbieAddress is the address of the newbie
     */
    function newbieExists(address _newbieAddress) public view returns (bool) {
        require(_newbieAddress != address(0), "Invalid address");
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < newbies.length; i++) {
            if (newbies[i].newbie == _newbieAddress) {
                return true;
            }

>         }

Reviewer 4: `return false` is missing
